Bioaerosols have important impacts on human health (EACCI, 2015; Pawankar et al., 2013) and agriculture (Cunha et al. 2016; Oteros et al. 2014), and serve as important indicators for identification of invasive species (Karrer et al., 2015; Sikoparija et al., 2009) and climate change (Zhang et al. 2015; Ziello et al. 2012). As such, networks to monitor these particles, particularly pollen and spores, have been established in many countries over the past decades (Hertel et al., 2013). At present, the majority of these networks employ manual methods based on Hirst-type volumetric samplers (Hirst, 1952) for monitoring purposes. Air sucked is drawn through these devices and particles impact onto a rotating tape, which is usually collected and analysed using light microscopy manually on a weekly basis.

Standards to ensure comparability within and across networks have been established for routine monitoring of airborne pollen and spores (Galan et al. 2014; CEN/TS 16868, 2015). Nevertheless, these methods are known to suffer from a number of shortcomings, including collection efficiency onto the rotating tape (Orlandi et al,. 2014; Mandrioli et al., 1998),  errors in estimates of the flowrate used to calculate concentrations (Oteros et al., 2017), sampling efficiency (Sikoparija et al., 2011; Tormo-Molina et al., 1996; Käpylä and Penttinen 1981),  issues related to the manual counts (Rojo, 2019; Comptois et al., 1999; Pedersen and Moseholm, 1993), and quality control (Sikoparija et al., 2016; Berti et al. 2009). 

While several studies have compared measurements from separate devices of the same kind, they have rarely been relatively few comparisons of more than two devices and often these have been at considerable distance from one another (e.g. Irdi et al., 2002; Gottardini and Cristofolini, 1997; Ekebom et al., 1997; Rizzi et al., 1992; Meiffren, 1988).  Molina et al. 2013 compared five traps at the same site and found significant differences in terms of the timing of peak pollen concentrations when hourly data were considered, however, no such differences were evident in the analysis of daily data. In contrast, Rojo et al. 2019 compared three devices in Munich, Germany, and two traps in Zrenjanin, Serbia, and found average standard deviations of 34% between Hirst-type traps, even when daily averages were considered. Although ratios of mean pollen concentrations between the instruments were mostly close to 1, they found that the standard deviations of the pollen concentrations varied significantly on the daily scale; a possible explanation for why no significant differences in previous work (Rojo et al., 2019). 

Fully understanding all source of errors related to traditional manual measurements is particularly important given the advent of automatic pollen monitors based on new technologies such as image-recognition (Oteros et al., 2019?) and air-flow cytometry (Sauvageat et al., 2019; Crouzy et al., 2016). For validation purposes, these new, real-time instruments are compared against traditional, manual observations and it is thus essential to understand what level of error can be expected from the various measurement techniques to make robust comparisons. 

In this study we compare measurements from three Hirst-type traps placed side-by-side in Payerne, Switzerland, from the pollen season of 2013. While these observations date back somewhat, counting methods have not changed significantly since and the data remain valid. We aim to investigate more fully the variability between measurements at the same location at both the daily and hourly scale. 
